back to the rstudio enterprise community meetup. Hope everyone's having a great start to the week.
If you've just joined now, feel free to say hi through the chat window and maybe
where you're calling in from. Because we're focusing on Shiny today, maybe also share
what's your favorite Shiny app you've ever created or a public app that you've seen. I
always love to see new examples. Special welcome if this is your first time joining us today.
This is a friendly and open meetup environment for teams to share different use cases and teach
lessons learned, just meet each other and ask questions too. And so they happen every Tuesday
at 12 eastern time. I'll say most Tuesdays at 12 eastern time. But I'll share a link in the
chat where you can find out about their upcoming events too. But together we're all dedicated to
making this space inclusive and an open environment for everybody, no matter your experience or
industry or background. During the event, you can ask questions wherever you're watching from. So
if you're on YouTube, you can ask there. If you're on LinkedIn, you can ask there.
And you can also ask questions anonymously as well through the Slido link that I'll just put
up on the screen here right now. We'll try to answer as many questions as possible at the end
of the presentation too. Today we have the pleasure of learning about open source environmental
monitoring done with Shiny. And with that, I would love to bring my friend here up on stage, Wayne
Jones, who will be presenting today. Thanks, Wayne. Thank you very much. Can you see the screen?
Everything looking okay? Yep, looks good. Well, thanks a lot for the opportunity to talk to you
today about my experiences with open source monitoring with Shiny. I'm going to talk
principally today about an application that we've built called GWS, that stands for Groundwater
Spatial Temporal Data Analysis. A little bit about myself, I'm Wayne Jones. I'm a principal data
scientist in Shell Global Solutions, and I've been working in Shell for 15 years now. And I would say
that this is the project I've been working on for the longest, almost since I've been at Shell.
A little bit about soil and groundwater activities at Shell and the wider industry.
Shell obviously operates globally across different countries with different types of assets here. I
think there's a terminal here, pictured in the bottom right. We manage a large amount of land,
and we have some cases of groundwater risk in remediation. For example, if a petrol tank
at a fuel station leaks, we have to remediate the situation. We do that with working with the
environmental regulators. And we do things proactively monitoring, so our larger sites,
typical, even at binaries and terminals, we always monitor the groundwater.
We look for any contamination. The way that we operate in Shell is we work with third-party
environmental engineering companies. They typically go out and they do the analysis,
give us reports, and they work with the environmental regulators to come and remediate the
solution as and when needed. And we've got a long history of research and development with academia
and joint industry projects, and we've got a number of projects that we've been involved in.
So, first and foremost, what is GWSDAT? Well, GWSDAT is a collaborative project between
Shell and the University of Glasgow. It's a user-friendly, open-source, decision support tool
for analysis of groundwater monitoring data. Underlying it is the ability of Shell to
open-source decision support tools for analysis of groundwater monitoring data.
Underlying it is effectively our statistical programming language, and we use a combination
of our packages, obviously including Shiny, together with some custom-developed algorithms
we've built at the University of Glasgow as well. It's been around for a long time. I think
I can't remember, to be honest with you, it's that long ago, but I think it's about around 2010
when we released the first version, and there's a few links there for where you can actually
download and install GWSDAT there. Probably the best for this audience today is the gwsdat.net,
and that's hosted by the University of Glasgow. I'm not going to start by telling you where it is
now, I'm going to start by saying where it was effectively, right. So the way GWSDAT used
to work before Shiny was effectively, it was a combination of an Excel add-in
which contained various functions including data input templates. Here's an example of a very
old-fashioned looking data input template, and we've had a graphical interface using the rpanel
package which is basically a wrapper for tclpk, which is, you can see a snapshot of the GUI here
in the bottom right. I don't know if any of you guys, probably not, have actually used tclpk.
It has very strange programming paradigms, very, very difficult
programming, and the rpanel package is basically a wrapper which wraps up some of these,
dare I say, obscure tclta functions, right, and that makes it a bit more complicated, but the
long and short of it, it's still very, very hard, right, and so when Shiny became popular,
it was actually the University of Glasgow that approached Shell and said, look, we think this
would be strategically a really good idea to do this, and what's more, they were willing to go
above and beyond the call of duty and do it and actually do it for themselves as well, right,
and in that process, we took, you know, Git had come about as well, right, and it shows how long
this has been around for, and I've put a GitHub site there where we host the glus.app package
there, and it's open and visible to view, and you can view all the code from there.
Before I give a demonstration of the tool in action, I think it's worth pointing out what
it's actually designed to do. It's there for the analysis of trend and groundwater monitoring.
How that typically works, right, is you get a site and you construct wells with the active
underlying water table, you take samples of the water, send them to the lab for analysis,
and they come back with the concentrations of the various different solutes, so xylene,
toluene, total hydrocarbons, a lot, right, and the job of glus.app is to help analysts interpret
trends. Is it going down? Is it going up? Where is this concentration spreading to?
And to do that, we use smoothing statistics, and I'll give more examples of this during the
demonstration as well, both smoothing in one-dimensional time series, for example using
local linear regression. We also use spatial smoothing. I think we do the groundwater
elevation now, but uniquely in the industry, we use a spatial temporal smoother,
which effectively, it's the way that the industry typically works, is you get a concentration contour
for one round of sampling. It's another concentration contour independently to the
second round that you collect this information, and so on, and so on, and so on. So in the old
traditional way of doing things, you know, you would have three sort of spatial cricking models here,
but glus.app does it differently, effectively does it in a one-er,
right, and there are various different benefits of doing that, which is subject to the paper that I'll
reference later on, one of it being data extraction efficiency, where you just get more information
out for the same amount of data, one spatial temporal model, rather than having separate
independent spatial. Worth pointing out that it was with the help of the University of Glasgow,
the underlying methodology for the spatial temporal statistics is penalised spline,
line-based methodology, and we went for this way more than anything because of the speed of
computation. There are other things like Gaussian process modelling, three-dimensional cricking,
but we found them to take a long time to run. So at that point there, I'm going to move over to
a bit of a demonstration of what the actual tool, I'm going to start off by saying what it used to
look like, so you get a look and feel for it. We have a GWS stat add-in, and this is typically how
most people in industry access to your GWS stat add-in. The way it used to work was here,
this is the old data input format here, there's effectively two tables, and they need to be
populated, you've got the historical monitoring data table, this is the name of the well,
the constituent, the date it was sampled, together with the concentration value.
In addition to concentrations, you can add groundwater elevations, this is how high the
water table is, and that enables you to estimate groundwater flow direction.
And the second table is a table of the well coordinates, and these are treated like
castings. What happens is, in terms of the connectivity between
Excel and R, it's a bit of a hack if I'm being totally honest with you, when you click
analyze from the data menu here, there's various options I don't have time to go into,
but basically what's happening here is it's using VBA macro, so basically it takes
to create CSV files here, and then it's running R in batch mode, and returning this
graphical user interface, this is again going back to the old style of doing things here,
so you can see here we have, quite involved as Rachel said, there's quite a lot going on,
it's quite a hit to the senses, but it does give you the different graphical output right,
but then I wanted to show you this to show you the progression in terms of
graph keys, and in terms of how it looks on the eye, and the underlying functionality.
Professor Adrian Bowman, who was behind this R power package, I asked him how did he feel about
Shiny coming along, and basically taking over, and he was ecstatic, he was really pleased,
you know it just shows broken. Anyway I'll move over to the newer version of GISRF,
that's the wrong country version, version 3.12, the Excel add-in looks a lot nicer,
there's various different data input templates here, in addition to a basic example, we have
a more comprehensive example, which shows off the more groundwater specific functionality,
but one of the nice things about it is the ability to overlay a shape file as well,
I probably won't have time to do that, but let me do the basic example, if I get more time I'll
highlight that one here, I just want to show the basic functionality here, again it's the same
trick, it's copying these into CSVs, using them as input files into R, running in batch mode,
and then it does the modeling, and then it provides a graphical user interface,
still working on it at the moment, here we go in Shiny, so this is the new Shiny graphical
user interface for GWSRF. Again you can see instantaneously it looks a lot nicer,
it looks a lot more up-to-date, you don't have to overlay all the graphs in one place,
you know you did lots of tabs and more sophisticated functionality,
this initial plot here is called the spatial plot, you've got the locations of the wells,
together with the names of the wells underneath it, and above it the last constant, the last
measured value on top of the well location, overlaid or superposed with the axis on the
right hand side there are the predictions of this spatial template, and you can scroll it back,
scroll it forward in time, for example, you basically build up an image of how this plume
mass has changed over time, okay, and in addition to that one of the functionalities,
and to better quantify what exactly has happened to the plume, because
without having these objective measures, we're getting confused about the interpretation,
but let me give an example of how we come across that, we press this button here, plume diagnostics,
what this does here, it takes a time slice from this spatial template, delineates a plume with a
prescribed threshold value of 10 micrograms per litre, and once it's enclosed, it uses a
numerical interface to give you a plume mass and a plume area, and you can effectively
track that through time, so you can effectively, you know, measure the total amount of contamination
at your site, and you get, if you press this tab here, for example, what you get is a time series
of plume mass, total plume area, and the average plume concentration,
so this is an objective measure that we calculate from the underlying analysis,
and which doesn't rely on the interpretation of the user of these plots.
There's various drop-down boxes here on the right-hand side, where you can choose different
options, different substances from the initial data sets, I've done xylene there, you can change
the units, there's a range of different plot types, if for whatever reason you just want to
plot the data, you can do plot terrain circles, for example, you can toggle well labels on and off,
show the groundwater contour here, so the blue arrows correspond to the estimated
groundwater direction of flow and strength, effectively you can see in this situation here,
because the water levels are high in the kind of northwest region, and low in the southeast,
we anticipate the groundwater flow in that direction. The blue arrows are estimated with a
technique of doing a triangulation between the well locations, and fitting a plane to them,
just reading the gradient of that off, but the contours are done with a low F smoother, that's
basically a local linear regression. The nice thing about here, the two independent methods of
trying to estimate the same thing, and you can see generally speaking, you have a good agreement,
multiple lines of evidence effectively. There's a whole host of variety of different ways that
you can output the format as well, one of the nice things is the ability to generate
PowerPoint animations, what this does here, is it basically runs it through time in an animation,
and it will output the results in a PowerPoint slide pack, like so, and they're all overlaid
exactly over one another, right, and so typically we see these styles of contours being attended to
by the reports that go to environmental regulation.
Loads of other things I can show, I'll just go to the time series plot, this is a combination
where you can look at different wells, and the different substances on a well by the well level
basis. It plots the data, and it overlays it with a local linear regression to the point. Again,
challenging intervention where they just typically do, you know, linear fits, you know,
and there's examples here where, you know, interpretation of a linear fit is a lot different
to what it was with the transmute of linear fits, it's just flat basically, whereas this transmute
is not constrained to be monotonic in direction, and interpretation here I think is closer to
which is mainly increasing rapidly and slowly. Loads of other functionality, again,
you can overlay the groundwater levels, you can show legends, you can export in a variety of
different formats, and there's other functionalities which allow you to generate specific
reports as well, which is neat. This one is a two by two matrix that could involve a different
combination of wells there. Obviously, there's potentially a lot of different combinations of
wells and solutes, right, so what we have here is the trend and threshold indicator matrix,
this is where it has a high, it's a lookup table of all the combinations, particularly
time slice, and it gives you a colour key reporting on the trend, right, and you can see
that, you know, green, dark green means it's trending downwards very quickly,
red and dark red, strongly increasing, so this is a high level lookup about what wells
you may be having issues with, and the ones you're drawing attention to here are Benzene from
monitoring well 7, Bond Benzene from monitoring well 11, let's do a deep dive on that, let's go to
Bond Benzene monitoring well 7, and you can see, yes, indeed, that bit by bit, it's increasing rapidly,
and 11 the same as well, right, and that might be harder to spot if you're going through each one
of them individually, and there's an equivalent plot, but not looking at trend, but the absolute
level of air, and it's basically a flat plate plot, going above, below, or statistically not
bad. There's a variety of different plots here as well, this is one of my personal
favourites, it uses lattice, as most people might recognise, right, we haven't moved into
GT plots yet, we might do one day in the future, and you can just customise this, this is basically
all the concentration data for all the wells at this site, right, you can see that the different
volumes are in different colours, and each cell corresponds to a different well, right,
it's a very, very concise plot, it's also quite useful for looking at the correlation between
the different wells. In addition to that, there's a spatial temporal prediction, and this is basically
where it overlays the predictions in the spatial temporal model on top of the observed data, just
measures, and you can see in this example, reasonably well, the only thing I would say
is that the model is slightly over predicting the concentrations at minus one, and slightly
under predicting the concentration at minus two wells, and you can choose a different
volume accordingly like that as well. You can customise the colour key, this was something
that was implemented, and this is the colour key for the spatial plot here, this is something
that was actually implemented in response to user feedback, and then there's various different
options that you can go into that, the most important one being the model setting,
the resolution of the actual underlying piece by model, and it's a combination of basically
how long are you willing to wait for, versus the complexity of the efficiency of the model.
There is other functionality that I can talk about, but I just want to show one more thing
in the comprehensive example, I've alluded to this earlier, I'll start running this
again in response to user feedback, when we first released this, the first thing that
people asked for is the overlay of baseline, and in this third column here, table here,
we have, you can basically point it to a shapefile, and then it will pick up all the
remaining shapefiles, and then it will just overlay that basic vector mapping geometry
over the predictions of the spatial template, you'll see it now, but there you go, you can
see that this is actually a vectorization, these are the individual fuel pumps, and this really
helps the environmental consultants, you know, it gives them, it grounds them in where exactly
these concentrations are. This is, I've highlighted to you the local version of the app,
this is for local installation, you know, we install it as an app package effectively, right,
together with the Excel add-in, but there's a publicly available implementation of this
online, and then this is the advantage of going Shiny, right, previous architecture that was only
available locally, but with Shiny, we deploy it over the web, and, you know, in the past,
it also opens the door in terms of various different file formats, right, so in the past,
you could lock down to Excel add-in, but here we have various, you can manually enter the data,
and then this is, there's a couple of examples here as well, the link will be in the slides
afterwards, don't worry, so have a go yourself and see, and let me have your feedback.
At that point, I'll move back, so in the slides, which will get shared afterwards,
there's some screenshots of what I've just demonstrated, but I'll move on to the
the kind of status of where we're at now with Judarest, and it's been used and been around
for a long, long time, and when we did the last questionnaire, there was four main points
that it came down to, the design optimization of monitoring remediation programs, right, you know,
you just see things you wouldn't otherwise see effectively, right, you know, early identification
and potentially new releases, and one example here is when we were actually
promoting Judarestat, the first version, the way we did it was we asked people for their data sets,
and we presented the data back to them in Judarestat, and even in those few exercises,
we saw they noticed things that they hadn't previously seen, so it really does,
you know, give you more insights than the traditional methods that they were guys were
looking at. Rapid interpretation of complex data sets, it's principally designed for the
smaller data sets, you know, where you have typically the retail fuel stations,
where you have small data sets, where it's perhaps not worth setting up an RPGIS, for example,
data set, but it works equally well for the large data set as well, and it's got inbuilt
reporting functions which take, you know, consultants in the past use to take ages to do
it, imagine replicating some of this stuff in Excel, it would take you ages and ages and ages.
So that on its own is a huge time saver.
One of the, you know, the good things about being open source is that it's open and free to use,
right, and it gets used a lot more than it would be if it wasn't open source, exactly.
One of the bad things about open source is you don't know exactly where it's being used, right,
but, you know, we've collected evidence of its applied use and it's been used, you know,
typically globally. It turns up in all manner of different places that, you know, today just
surprises me, you know, it's been used on the Navajo Indian Reserve in America, it was discussed
in an Indonesian, you know, student geology group, it's been used across the US, Australia,
you know, Pakistan and, you know, loads of different places across the globe. There's
a variety of different use cases at this web link here which is really useful.
We've worked with many environmental regulators and, you know, it's referenced in some of the
environment regulators' guidance documents and, you know, we've just highlighted there the UK
Environment Agency, but we have done, you know, joint presentations with the US EPA. They
particularly like the plume diagnostic tool, its ability to quantify, you know, the degree of
contamination in the plumes at the same time, effectively, and we are, you know, included in
the standardised or guidance documents for the field of groundwater monitoring. So, it's well
established and it's been around for a long time and it's still being used more and more and more.
I suppose the only downside of being open source is I don't know where it isn't being used, right,
so where are the gaps effectively is something I'd like to learn, so I could perhaps try and
look into that. You know, I suppose, you know, retrospectively looking back at, you know, why
it's been successful, and this was a good exercise, I suppose, although I haven't written
it down, it was the right tool for the right time, right. It wasn't trying to be more than
it actually was, it wasn't a hugely, hugely sophisticated statistical tool either, right,
you know, it's basically a visualisation tool with some three-dimensional smoothing effectively,
right, but critical was adopting the open source framework, especially in the field
of groundwater monitoring and environmental modelling in general, right. It increases
accessibility, so more and more people use it, more and more people that use it, the more well
respected and adopted it becomes. Also, there's transparency, you know, if we were using a black
box tool, our environmental regulators may be inclined to question the underlying methodology
when it's here, all laid out with all the code fully transparent, so it's fully open to state
and, you know, it's free to use, which is also important, you know, especially in certain
countries, but there are a lot of countries in the world who are using it now. Another critical
success has been developing that strong relationship with an academic family.
You know, we've had, we've typically done it with engagements with a string of different
PhD students, which has helped build that relationship, and we've been working now,
you know, over 10 years, and we're on our third PhD student as well. I think it's also worth
pointing out that the university was incentivised, UK-based university, by the research excellence
framework, right, and this is about quantifying the impact of academic work in society effectively,
right, and I think this was probably one of the reasons why Glasgow were willing to go above and
beyond the call of duty and put their own time and resources into actually developing the shiny
version of Geodeska, right, so they paid for a postdoc for a six-month period to
report the code where it was before into the shiny.
And other factors include computational speed, right, you know, when you work at Glasgow,
they say, well, there's kind of different models we could do, but there was always a
trade-off between the time it took to run the model versus, you know, the correct model,
and I think we hit upon a reasonable compromise in using piecewise, they're very, very quick.
I don't think it would have been adopted the way it had been if it took, you know,
sort of hours for it to run the model. The fact that it's computationally fast
is one of the, in my opinion anyway, one of the critical success factors, and that might be,
you know, slightly against some of the statistical penance out there, right, but
I definitely think it was the right choice. Again, no special data requirements,
this is interesting as well, right, you know, we didn't ask for any special data that we
didn't already have, it's just a piece of formatting it in a particular way for data
input, so there's no barriers effectively, but we made it as open and transparent and
reduced the barriers for entry, made it easy as possible. And of course, the one I would
like to talk about specifically is adopting that shiny framework, and I think that's been
absolutely one of the critical success factors, and there's many benefits of doing that effectively,
you know, first and foremost, it's a more sophisticated, up-to-date graph, we're
using interface, and I only know that because of what I was using previously, right, you know,
it was, you know, some of the older technologies there now, right, are not as nice to program in,
you know, it's very difficult in terms of them, and as a consequence of that, it's hard to support
and develop and maintain the interface, right, but, you know, shiny is a structured graphical
user programming, as a graphical, as a GUI programming syntax, which I really like, it
makes sense, there's plenty of documentation out there, there's plenty of tutorials, and there's
plenty of support out there, and it's taken GVESTAT as well, from being a local installation
to specific users, to being more widely adopted online, all the benefits of having an online
web app, you don't need to install anything, you can just go to a web url, and that's it,
and there is a publicly available version here, and that's been hosted by the University of
Glasgow, there's a lot of subscriptions around the apps.io, however, you know, this is mostly
the demonstration purposes, I would say, or fine if the data is, you know, sensitive or,
but, if you are concerned about data security, and then there are two pieces of advice, right,
one is you can go down the local installation, so keep it local, right, so any data you have
doesn't move off your own PC, for example, or if you want an online version of it, what you can do
is, is you can basically build your own internal shiny server service internally within your
computer, and I know, you know, Shell, we have our own RConnect internal service, and I know BP
have got their own internal service, because they've done it, got advice from me on how to do
it, basically, but obviously they see the value in using GVESTAT as well, to the point where they've
actually subscribed to the shiny server RConnect. Another benefit as well is that, you know,
it's been successful for GVESTAT, but the underlying architecture has actually been
used for other open source tools as well, right, so there's a monitoring toolbox,
it's by Kunkawi, again, it's an open source monitoring tool for LNAPL, LNAPL is the kind
of pollution you see on top of the puddles, you normally see the rainbows on top of the puddles,
it's, it's more related to that type of contamination, and again, open source toolbox,
you can look at from there. The interesting thing about this one is, yes, it's usually GVESTAT as a
modeling template, but in this one here, this is sort of bringing on to RStudio, and one of the
latest things out of RStudio is using a combination of both R and Python code in the same place,
and I asked them, you know, why, why, why, why did you do it in both languages, right, because I think
it is easy to maintain in one language, but they said, you know, it was resource, right, they had,
they didn't have dedicated R developers, they didn't have dedicated Python code, so they, you,
by RStudio having the flexibility, by Shiny having the flexibility to use R and Python together,
they could use different developers to get the job done. I think that's, that's an important point,
especially for where RStudio is going. Going forward, and I'm conscious of the time now,
because I'm coming to an end, where we see the future is, is through sustainable remediation,
right, and this is, again, alluding to what I said earlier about spatial-temporal, you know,
it's basically giving you, what we did was a research exercise where we compared the data
efficiency of doing the old traditional technique of doing independent spatial modeling versus
one spatial-temporal model, and there was a range of benefits, including
more information using fewer observations.
You can achieve the same level of performance, and if you turn that a little bit on its head,
you can say the spatial-temporal methods can achieve the same level of performance,
but with fewer data points, right, fewer data points means fewer something, right, fewer,
fewer journeys in vehicles to do it, fewer lab tests, right, and, and, and lesser impact on
environment, right, and with that, you know, the, and this is a current theme,
uh, with our latest student, um, Peter at the University of Glasgow, so we're trying to implement
cost-effective spatial-temporal approaches to optimize ground and monitoring,
irrespective of the design, we know we can get more, more data efficient, better efficient,
using spatial-temporal, but if you actually add the fact that we know we're going to analyze it
in a spatial-temporal model and design it like that, we can even be more efficient, and that
means, effectively, less sampling, less wells, um, and less impact on the environment. Um,
last closing point, um, I guess, what haven't I done, which I would really like to do with
the rest of that, uh, you know, typical data format is in Excel, and, um, that's because
typically the data sets are warehoused in Excel, but more and more now, we're seeing, you know,
central databases where it's managed in a lot better way, right, and the approach up to now
has been basically to query these databases in gws.format and then just put them into Excel.
That's still a kind of two- or three-step process. What I'd really like to do is pull integration,
right, so you could log into that, and it actually just gives you a table, and it automatically
queries that table from the site that you choose, so there's one portal that you could design,
and anyone in, say, Shell or any organization would basically have, you know, at their fingertips
an analysis of all our groundwork.
That's one of my to-do in the future. I think I have to do that.
And on that note, Rachel.
Thank you so much, Wayne. It's amazing to see how companies are able to work together, too,
and use this open-source work. I really love the case studies that you put on the website. I wanted
to share that in the chat with everybody in a minute here, but it seems like you've thought
so much about the marketing and communication of the app as well and, like, anticipating people's
demands and knowing that people may want to use this from Excel and using the Excel add-in,
so I'm really curious, how do you gather all this
user feedback and kind of, like, know how to communicate this out to everybody?
Yeah, that's a good question. I would say we, although it might look like we do a lot of
marketing and communication, it's, we probably didn't do as much as we could have done, right,
and I think, but basically, it's working hand-in-hand with people, understanding and
gathering their feedback. On the GitHub site, there's a list of suggestions for improvements,
and the way I operate, basically, is, you know, we get lots of different people asking for lots
of different functionality, but if lots of people are asking for the same thing, right,
that's when it will go up the list of files.
That, I just realised, is more on the specific functionality of G-REST, but in terms of
how do we market it to begin with, how do we promote it, how do we get feedback,
ground water monitoring, you know, there's a whole field of environmental
engineering, effectively, in Shell, there's teams who are fully integrated into the industry.
We've presented in lots of different areas, you know, we work hand-in-hand with CLAIRE,
that's Detaminated Land Action in Real Environments, that's the kind of European
portal, ground water, and we also work with the American Petroleum Institute. Professional bodies,
I would say, is probably the one word answer to that question. Sorry, that was a bit of a
long-winded answer there, but I would say the thing I think we're lacking, right, and this is
the resourcing is training, you know, it's quite intuitive to use, thankfully, but I think, you
know, the one piece of feedback we're getting lately is that there should be more training
material out there and we're in the process of putting some of it together. Awesome, thank you.
I see Russ asked a great question over on Slido that I'll pull up in a second, but I just wanted
to remind everybody, if you want to ask questions, you can ask them anonymously with the link on the
screen, but you can also just use LinkedIn or YouTube and it will pull it over here for us,
but let me show on the screen. Russ said, hey, Wayne, very interesting solution,
what geospatial libraries are you using here?
That's a good question. Off my head, right, I'm struggling a bit, but if you look on my GitHub
site, it will, it should tell you the dependency on the package.
And you can see there, look, if I share that, if you can, there's the different packages
I'm using there as well. SM, SP and Splunks are the ones that are the spatial in nature.
Yeah, we're not using any of the off, to be fair, there's very little spatial temporal stuff
out there, certainly nothing off the shelf. And for those that are out there, almost insist
on the data being regular in nature, because it's convenient.
We don't have regular data, so we've had to build our own components
in there, and all the Splunk code is within the package source.
I think this might have answered then this question, but are there additional geospatial
libraries you'd like to use instead, but would require too much rework?
Yeah, I mean, we are in the process of building, you know, different additional functionalities,
right? I don't think there's anything there that we want to implement, because if it was,
we would have already implemented it. We're having to build this stuff ourselves now,
probably because it's not been done before. So case in point, you know, what we've implemented,
leave on well out analysis is the latest thing. So this is the ability to basically just drop a
well, refit and compare the results directly against one another. Going forward, there'll be
more sophisticated tools to do this, you know, which will actually give you sampling designs as
to what wells you should sample at different points. And we haven't found any, much to my
regret, we haven't found any of their packages out there already. There we go. So, yeah,
there we go. So having to develop them ourselves, basically.
If anybody knows of them, feel free to share them in the chat too.
Please do. Yeah, that would be really good.
Another question that was over on Slido anonymous question was, I know you just shared the GitHub,
but do you have a reference for your work generating the PowerPoint slides from Shiny?
Oh, sorry, I muted you.
Yes, I'm trying to think what we actually use, we use something like that, right? But
if you have a look at the code, it will tell you how to do it. If you search in the GitHub,
off the top of my head, I can't remember, I think it's using Officer.
If you search for PowerPoint in the GitHub clone repository, search for PowerPoint,
you'll find it there as well. There is a very old fashioned package called R2PPT.
I am the author of that package, but it's a bit outdated now and it's probably going to get
crammed fairly soon.
In fact, if you look at the reproducible research task view, you'll find, here we go.
This is a good one for telling about PowerPoint.
Perfect. Do you want to share that in the, oh, you're right on top of it.
Share that in our private chat here and I can copy that over.
One of the things that I have experimented with is using our markdown as a report creation,
where instead of doing PowerPoint slide packs, you basically have an animation in a Word document.
All right. What I found up to now, it's very easy to create some HTML reports and PDFs,
bit tougher with Word, but I think it needs to be Word because the consultants will need to,
always need to amend standard report. So that's still a work in progress.
I just saw a bunch of other Slido questions, but I'm just going to copy over so I can show
them on the screen here. But one was, is the, for Excel manipulation, is OpenXLSX being used?
Sorry, Wayne, I was muting you because I think it was echoing my voice, but I unmuted you.
No, it doesn't. This is, we used to use a package called add-on client, but we found it
kind of not particularly well supported. So I wrote a little bit of a hack to be honest here,
right? If you download and do that add-in, you will see that all the code is there
on how to do it, right? So the way it actually does it is it dynamically builds like a text file
on the fly, which sort of saves off your different variables and all the rest of it.
And then it sends that over together with the datasets as input to an R batch file.
And that's kind of how it works. And that works fine because it's only one way traffic, right?
And that you're just sending the data from Excel into R. If you had to do the other way around as
well, then the architecture, what I'm currently using would fall flat in place.
I see some nice feedback in the Slido. Hey, Wayne, nice presentation and shiny app.
Love how everything is reactive to input widgets and how you've got rid of a trigger button.
And the follow-up question there was, how long did you take to build the application? And what
were the key things you knew needed to be in the app from the start?
Yeah, that's a good question, right? I mean, in terms of, yeah, it wasn't me that actually
did the first shiny version, right? We had a postdoc who was doing it on a six-month basis.
He ported most of the functionality that was there before. And then I've added to it since,
effectively, right? You know, key to the number one was the spatial plot, right?
Having that movie of the spatial distribution and slowly exchange it through time is number one,
right? And then everything effectively follows from that. That's the unique plot, right? That's
the plot that was really hard to do in Excel for example, which is typically how some of the
consoles used to do this in the past. You could do the well-timed series plus. You could do,
you know, different overlays and the rest of it. But the spatial distribution design,
that's clearly the qua, yeah? The unique selling point. I hope that makes sense.
And I guess I would say convenience as well, right? Having it all there in one place,
you know, in a reproducible, repeatable fashion, right? You know, the data input's always the same
and you get lots of options and plotting. The same cannot be said of doing it in Excel manually,
take all day for people to come up with a lattice of plots. You can do that in literally seconds.
Thank you. One other question is, did you have to make the case for using open source?
This is a very good question, right? I didn't, you know what, you know, it wasn't even my idea
to go open source, all right? It was the guys at the groundwater. They work in the space,
they knew how it worked and they realised early on that open source was the way to go for the
reasons I pointed out earlier. And what I'd say is, you know, Shell is an entity, you know,
more and more, you know, we want to adopt, use and also write open source code as well,
and there's various people I know. And it's also really great motivator, right, with our employees.
I think people really, really like giving back their open source and it motivates them to promote
open source and stuff. And I think we'll do more of it going forward with Shell, definitely.
And I was just curious, Wayne, and again, if anybody wants to ask other questions,
just a reminder that you can, if you just joined now, you can ask them in YouTube,
you can ask them in LinkedIn, but you can also use the Slido that I showed on the screen right now
to ask questions anonymously too. But thinking about like the upkeep of the application and as
you make improvements to it out, I was just curious, Wayne, what does your team look like?
And how many shiny developers do you have? And how many data scientists?
Yeah, I mean, what, yeah, what I'd say is, there is, I would say there's a smallish team,
right? You know, so I have Luke from the ground, soil and groundwater team, who's the subject
and active expert in that field. And then I have the collaboration with the University of Glasgow,
tends to be more the R&D app. In terms of support and maintenance, it tends to be me, right?
And again, this comes back to being open source. I don't know whether,
I mean, I suppose I get, you know, four or five emails a week or something like that on average,
I'd say. I don't know whether a lot of people using it and they have a small number of issues,
or whether there's a small number of people using it with a large proportion of issues.
But yeah, it is a worry, really. I mean, you know, in terms of sustainability,
you know, if I fell underneath a bus, God forbid, you know, I think there needs to be
a better plan B in place, right? Too much of it is just relying purely on me.
But that's one of the reasons why we're doing it open and transparent. We welcome people to come
on board, you know, get involved in these open source projects, you know, so it doesn't rely
just solely on one person. So if anyone wants to volunteer, then we'll gladly help out by all means.
Thank you. I see another question that came over on Slido from Ivan, and it is,
thanks for sharing, Wayne. We're facing a bottleneck with OpenXLSX going from R to Excel,
would have never thought of calling R via VBA. Is the VBA code in GitHub too?
Is the VBA code in GitHub too? The VBA code is
embedded within the Excel add-in, right? If I just look at the code,
it's in, I think it's in the X data, and it's in that file there. Yeah, so it's in that add-in
and all the code is there, visible.
Thank you, and I will copy that over right now to YouTube, and then over here to LinkedIn.
Thank you all for the great questions too. I just want to double check over to Slido,
because I see somebody just asked about the link there. So just a reminder that
I put that link to ask questions into the chat on YouTube and the chat on LinkedIn,
but I'll show it once more on the screen here to give people a second to get their
final questions in there too. Let's see.
Thank you so much for sharing the GitHub links as well. It's really helpful to be able to share
these code examples with everyone too. I was curious, Wayne, I know you mentioned the LinkedIn
group for GWS, but if people are interested in working on this with you, what's the best place
to get in touch with you? Just drop me an email.
Oh, your audio just went out for a little bit if you want to get a little closer.
Right, alternatively, you know, have a look at the GitHub page and, you know, have a look at the
issues, suggest some enhancements, all that stuff. I mean, what I'd say about it, it's a very
specific tool, right? It's a specific tool, right? So, you know, really apply it, but that's
its kind of strength, really, is that it's a very specific tool for a specific area. So,
really, you kind of look at the people that work in the geology space who have a bit of domain
knowledge to come in and be able to help on that side as well, but everyone is welcome to help,
believe you me. I see one other question that somebody just put into the YouTube chat,
and they said, I'm curious to know how you manage any confounding variables with the data provided
in the open source you presented. Let's see, I'll try and copy this over.
Sorry, they asked to be anonymous, so I don't want to just like show it up on the screen,
but I can reread it. It said, I'm curious to know how they manage any confounding variables
with the data provided in the open source you presented, or biased data.
It's a good question. I would say, typically, we don't have any confounders.
I'll go into that in a minute. In the time series plots, right, it's not like we're
doing a regression of one against the other, it's all against time.
When it comes to fitting the spatial plot, right, it's using splines,
right, it uses a three-dimensional spline basis, and obviously these variables, by design,
are not going to confound one another. The danger there is overfitting, right,
more than confounding parameters, and this is where p-spline comes into its own, is that it penalises
the step changes from these parameters estimated from the spline, and that's what controls the
degree of complexity and balances between under and overfitting. Yeah, so
confounding variables isn't really an issue for that reason, because we use spline by design,
they're not confounded. Overfitting is, but it's controlled through this penalised drawing.
Awesome. I think we got to everybody's questions over here on Slido and YouTube and LinkedIn,
but thank you all for the great questions. I did just want to let everybody know that while
you're all here, if you are interested in joining future events, we'd love to see you at those.
You can view upcoming meetups, which happen every Tuesday at the same time at this calendar here,
and we also have a data science hangout every Thursday at noon eastern time as well,
where you can hear from different data science leaders in the space in a very informal setting
and ask any and all questions to them. But next week, I am very excited to also have a presentation
on intro to using Git and GitHub in our studio, and so that will be next Tuesday.
I just want to say thank you so much, Wayne. It's amazing to see your team's use case and hear about
your experience. It's really awesome to hear how you're working together with environmental
agencies and other companies as well through this too. Thank you so much for sharing with us.
Thank you.
Have a great rest of the day, everybody.
Thank you. Bye.
Thanks, Wayne.